---
layout: post
title: Just Don't Have Kids
---

It is my hope that this click-baity title will resonate with a sense of poetic justice. Last year I had an interesting conversation with a friend. He had never been introduced to the idea of genetic counseling, and after a conversation broadly introducing the idea of genetic counseling I made the claim that it is a form of eugenics. In the very base of the language, “screening”, where a screen is synonymous to a sieve, implies that something is being selected out, and what lives are terminated reflect implicitly assumed white supremecist, capitalist, and ableist ideals. 
In some of these cases, tests indicate that a fetus will be stillborn, that the birth will seriously endanger the person who is pregnant, or in a stickier situation that the fetus will have a terminal illness that kills them as a newborn. I include these examples to acknowledge that reasons to pursue an abortion are highly individual and nuanced; I do not claim to fully understand nor do I shame any individual who makes such a decison. That said, at a social level there is a disturbing phenomenon of screening for and aborting fetuses flagged as having non-terminal disabilities such as down's syndrome, and there is a lack of recognition that individuals participating in this phenomenon are responsible. On the contrary, these abortions are largely justified and even framed as a heroic deed on two grounds: reducing burden on parents, and reducing suffering of the child.
	Regarding the first point, I would point someone to considering Eli Clare's conception of interdependence. When disability is framed as a burden for caretakers, we reinforce the idea that caregiving relationships are unilateral, and we reduce the value of individuals to their self-sufficiency.
Furthermore, when such abortions are framed as an ethical decision to reduce suffering of the child-to-be, suffering is often being defined by individuals not having perspective on that disability and the social causes of potential suffering are completely disregarded. This becomes especially apparent in the born female analogy; while being born as a female will lead an individual to face increased marginalization and struggle in life, because the nature of this suffering is recognized as social, people see the necessity of continuing to have female children and instead address the underlying social issues. It is very telling that we do not consider the social construction of disability or how our built environment can be held responsible for the suffering of people with disabilities.
	Motivations for abortion may be more complicated; as one example, working families may not be able to provide the at-home care necessary for a child who needs more support. In this instance, a decision to abort may very well reflect the performance-based values of our society at-large, which offers inadequate social welfare for working class families in any situation, but particularly if they or their children are not contributing to the productive or reproductive mechanisms of capitalism and heteropatriarchy. That said, this assumption may itself be problematic, and reflect my ignorance of what resources are available for parenting children with disabilities. Feminist philosopher Susan Wendell writes: “prospective parents of a fetus with a potential disability may not be given information about the quality of life that people with those disabilities can and do have, or the services and support available to parents should they choose to have the babies.”
	What’s more, in many cases, even affluent families are pressured toward abortion either through their medical practitioners or their culture, even if they can provide adequate care for their children. Wendell writes that it is not “reassuring to insist that genetic screening, prenatal diagnosis, and selective abortion are voluntary, indivdual choices, unlike previous eugenic efforts, which were often coercive.” My family experienced this pressure from the medical side, when they underwent screening and were required to meet with a genetic counselor to talk about their baby who might have down syndrome. At the end of the meeting, they were asked “have you made up your mind?” The doctor assumed, without ever having asked, that my parents were unsure about their decision to parent my sister because she might have down syndrome.
	My claim implicates individuals who have adequate means to raise a child with disabilities. This includes both individuals who make such choices on their own grounds, or through social or medical coercion because I find it important that we expand responsibility and awareness for such decisions.	Here I will use "disabled fetuses" to refer to a fetus diagnosed with either a non-terminal disability or a terminal disability where there is an active community of people affected by the disability advocating against such screenings and life-value judgements. All that to say, Affluent parents who plan to abort disabled fetuses are implicated in the reinforcement of capitalist, ableist, and white supremecist ideals and are practicing a form of modern eugenics. 
I don't think this makes those parents evil or bad or anything like that, which fits into a broader concept; we are very uncomfortable recognizing the ways in which we are personally implicated, directly or indirectly, in harmful systems because we tend to interpret a binary of being "good" or being "bad". Fitting such decisions into the context of our society allows us to interpret them as a balance between the happiness and comfort of parents and the consequences of their choices, but I am deeply uncomfortable with the mass effort to hide the negative side of these decisions and frame them as unilaterally good.
Furthermore, it's worth noting that children of any ability level born into families with such performance-based valuation of their children will be negatively affected. This decision reflects ignorance in understanding the lived experiences of people with disabilities, and calls into question the very motivations for their having children. What do they perceive as the advantage of having children who do not have disabilities? I see a few possibilities that are startling; I will focus on performance and independence.
	By performance standards I mean activities central to acceptance in our culture that particularly transfer to acceptance of a child’s parents by their peers as well, including a child’s work potential, athletics, and dating and interpersonal relationships. Here parents exhibit their own myth of control; in selecting children they expect are more equipped to perform according to accepted standards in these areas of life parents attempt to control for the behavior and activities of their children before they are even born. This creates expectations that simultaneously pressure already accepted children into higher standards of achievement, and reject aspects of their child’s identities that don’t fit into the norm of society. Parents who don’t want peculiar children may impose rigid gender roles, push children over the edge with academic or athletic pressure, or reject children who don’t conform to heterosexual and cisgender ideals.
	It’s possible parents want children who are more low-maintenance, or independent. Here they exhibit another effort to control for factors in life that are entirely unpredictable; for starters, there is no way to know the level of care a child will need. In addition, the idea of “temporarily abled” seems relevant; not only your children, but also your partner, your parents, or your siblings could at any instant become significantly disabled and require significant care. The idea that we can control the level of dependency from the loved ones in our life is an ignorant indulgence in the myth of control. It also raises the question; should you have a child if you aren’t prepared for them to need more support?
	Ultimately, these motivations for selecting children who don’t have disabilities reveal parenting values that can cause objectification, rejection, or negligence of their children. This suggests, although I would be cautious to apply a unilateral ethical system, that parents who have the means to support a child with disabilities but will select for non-disabled children should consider not becoming parents at all. This inspires a simple line of advice for parents who don't want to be implicated in a eugenic practice and who want to avoid subjecting any children to their unhealthy attitudes around value: just don't have kids.
Note that this perspective can be pushed to a point of tension; another friend asked what is the difference between aborting a child, and knowing that you have a predisposition to having a child with a disability and choosing not to have children. Certainly here the same argument does not apply because these people would not parent children at all. I’ll push that even further; do we have an obligation to have children with disabilities, or to be specifically screened for a predisposition and select for children with disabilities?
While I am not going to answer those questions, I’ll acknowledge that it would be a different world where disability was not only accepted, but actively valued for its own sake. Standing in the way of such a reality is the normalization of wide-scale eugenics in the form of genetic counseling and screening procedures, the attitudes of people who opt into them, and ignorance around life with a disability. I would like to close with the words from Wendell:

“There is a crucial difference between not wanting others to suffer from the burdens of a disability and not wanting those who will suffer from them to exist, between wanting to prevent or cure disabilities and wanting to prevent people with those disabilities from being born. For example, I would be terribly sorry to learn that a friend's fetus was very likely to be born with ME, but I would not urge her to abort it. In other words, many people with disabilities, while we understand quite well the personal burdens of disability, are not willing to make the judgement that lives like ours are not worth living.”
